---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "group-b"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "gxest203"
course_title: "foundations-of-computing:-from-hardware-essentials-to-web-design"
language: "english"
contributor: "@indhu-subash"
---

# GXEST203 - Foundations of Computing: From Hardware Essentials to Web Design  

## Course Objectives  

1. To introduce the students to the fundamental building blocks of an IT infrastructure including computing systems, peripherals, operating systems and networking.  
2. To make the learners capable of developing and deploying simple and dynamic websites.  

---

## Syllabus Modules  

### Module 1: Computer Hardware  
- CPU, Memory - Memory hierarchy: registers, cache, RAM, virtual memory.  
- Motherboard.  
- Computer Peripherals - I/O devices.  
- Storage devices - HDDs, SSDs, optical drives.  
- I/O communication and device management.  
- Interface cards – Buses.  
- Firmware - Boot process.  
  

---

### Module 2: Data Representation & CPU Architecture  
- Binary representation of data and numbers.  
- Integer Representation.  
- Data storage units - bits, bytes, kilobytes, etc.  
- ASCII and Unicode.  
- CPU Architecture and Instruction Set: Basic CPU architecture - ALU, registers, control unit.  
- Instruction format and assembly language (basics only).  
- Fetch-execute cycle and instruction execution.  
  

---

### Module 3: System Software & Networking  
- Computer System Software - Operating Systems.  
- Basic commands in Linux / Windows, Shell scripting (bash).  
- Computer Communications – LAN, MAN, WAN.  
- Client/Server networks, Peer-to-Peer networks, Topologies.  
- Basics of IP addresses, DHCP, NAT.  
- Network Security (Desktop & Perimeter).  
- DNS, VPN, Routers, Client-Server, Internet, WWW, Web servers.  
  

---

### Module 4: Web Design  
- Basics of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.  
- Understanding web content delivery.  
- Understanding HTML and XHTML connections.  
- Understanding Cascading Style Sheets.  
- Understanding JavaScript.  
  

---

## Reference Books  

- *Invitation to Computer Science* – G. Michael Schneider, Judith Gersting, Cengage, 2/e, 2020  
- *The Architecture of Computer Hardware, Systems Software, & Networking: An Information Technology Approach* – Irv Englander, Wiley, 5/e, 2014  
- *HTML, CSS, and JavaScript All in One, Sams Teach Yourself* – Julie C. Meloni, Jennifer Kyrnin, Pearson, 1/e, 2020  
- *The Elements of Computing Systems: Building a Modern Computer from First Principles* – Noam Nisan, Shimon Schocken, MIT Press, 2/e, 2021  
- *Peter Norton’s Introduction to Computers* – Peter Norton, McGraw Hill  

---
